[SYCL][Doc] Add new free function queries proposal (#5106)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/FreeFunctionQueries/FreeFunctionQueries.asciidoc

that is less error-prone to use. For example, if a function accepts a
`sycl::group`, the caller must assume that function may call a
`sycl::group_barrier` and ensure that associated control flow requirements are
satisfied. It is recommended that this extension is used only when modifying
existing interfaces is not feasible.

== Accessing Instances of Special SYCL Classes

The `sycl::ext::oneapi::this_kernel` namespace contains functionality related
to the currently executing kernel.

It is the user's responsibility to ensure that that these functions are called
in a manner that is compatible with the kernel's launch parameters, as detailed
in the definition of each function. Calling these functions from an incompatible
kernel results in undefined behavior.

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace oneapi {
namespace this_kernel {

size_t get_linear_id();

template <int Dimensions>
id<Dimensions> get_id();

template <int Dimensions>
item<Dimensions> get_item();

template <int Dimensions>
nd_item<Dimensions> get_nd_item();

template <int Dimensions>
group<Dimensions> get_group();

sub_group get_sub_group();

}
}
}
}
----

[source,c++]
----
size_t get_linear_id();

> ----

Author: Good point.  I'll update this -- I think the restrictions should be the same as `get_item()`.

> ----

Author: Fixed in d58457f8260b7b82649c65e64703919cb5bfe65f.

_Returns_: A `size_t` representing the current work-item's linear position in
the global iteration space. Multi-dimensional indices are converted into a
linear index following the linearization equations defined in Section 3.11.1 of
the SYCL 2020 specification.

[source,c++]
----
template <int Dimensions>
id<Dimensions> get_id();
----
_Preconditions_: `Dimensions` must match the dimensionality of the currently
executing kernel. The currently executing kernel must have been launched with a
`sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

> _Returns_: A `sycl::id` instance representing the current work-item in a
> `sycl::range`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Returns_: A `sycl::id` instance representing the current work-item in the
global iteration space.
```

I assume this is what we intend if this is an ND-range kernel?

[source,c++]
----
template <int Dimensions>
item<Dimensions> get_item();
----
_Preconditions_: `Dimensions` must match the dimensionality of the currently
executing kernel. The currently executing kernel must have been launched with a

> `sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

Author: That's a good question, and I don't know what's preferred here.

The SYCL specification only mentions two execution models [here](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_sycl_kernel_execution_model), and says that "Each work-item is identified by a value of type `item<N>`". So, a user might reasonably expect all kernels to support either `item` or `nd_item`.

I can see an argument that an implementation might have more optimization freedom if it can special-case compilation of kernels taking `id` arguments... But it also seems like it might add more implementation complexity.  If we say that it's illegal to access an `item` when the kernel's parameter is an `id`, we'd effectively be forcing implementations to start distinguishing between three types of kernel (instead of only two).

> `sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

Reviewer: I'm not sure either.  I don't think this would require the implementation to be more complex.  It simply allows an implementation to be more complex (and gain some optimization) if it wants to.

Does DPC++ currently optimize the case when the kernel takes an `id` rather than an `item`?

> `sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

Reviewer: Yes, agreed that an implementation would need to be more complex if it wanted to flag an error.

I assume your conclusion, therefore, is that `get_item()` can be called even from a kernel that is declared to take an `id` parameter?

> `sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

Author: Yes.  I think it's less cognitive burden for users (because there are only two execution models to worry about) and simpler for implementers in the long run (because introducing good error behavior later is desirable).

Do you think we need a non-normative note confirming that we're deliberately allowing `get_item()` to be called from a function accepting an `id`?

> `sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary, but I am not opposed.

> `sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

Author: Ok, I'll leave it as it is for now then.  If anybody is interested they can always read this discussion!

> _Returns_: A `sycl::item` instance representing the current work-item in a
> `sycl::range`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Returns_: A `sycl::item` instance representing the current work-item in the
global iteration space.
```

namespace oneapi {
namespace this_kernel {

size_t get_linear_id();

template <int Dimensions>
id<Dimensions> get_id();

template <int Dimensions>
item<Dimensions> get_item();

template <int Dimensions>
nd_item<Dimensions> get_nd_item();

template <int Dimensions>
group<Dimensions> get_group();

sub_group get_sub_group();

}
}
}
}
----

[source,c++]
----
size_t get_linear_id();
----
_Preconditions_: The currently executing kernel must have been launched with a
`sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

_Returns_: A `size_t` representing the current work-item's linear position in
the global iteration space. Multi-dimensional indices are converted into a
linear index following the linearization equations defined in Section 3.11.1 of
the SYCL 2020 specification.

[source,c++]
----
template <int Dimensions>
id<Dimensions> get_id();
----
_Preconditions_: `Dimensions` must match the dimensionality of the currently
executing kernel. The currently executing kernel must have been launched with a
`sycl::range` or `sycl::nd_range` argument.

_Returns_: A `sycl::id` instance representing the current work-item in the
global iteration space.

[source,c++]
----
template <int Dimensions>

> item<Dimensions> get_item();

Reviewer: Sorry, I noticed something else.

The `item` class has a second template parameter `with_offset`.  I think the idea is that you can define your kernel to take `item<Dim, false>` to gain some efficiency if you know it won't be invoked with an offset.  (The `offset` parameter to `parallel_for` is deprecated, but still exists in SYCL 2020.)

The default value of `with_offset` is `true`, so your current specification will always return the "offset" version of `item` even if the user requested the "no offset" version.  It seems like we probably don't want this?  I'm not sure if DPC++ optimizes the "no offset" case currently, but this would be something to check.

An option is to define this free function as always returning the "no offset" case, regardless of how the user defined the kernel.  That might make sense since the "offset" parameter is deprecated.

Author: > An option is to define this free function as always returning the "no offset" case, regardless of how the user defined the kernel. That might make sense since the "offset" parameter is deprecated.

I agree this makes sense.  I'll add a non-normative note explaining that because the `offset` parameter is deprecated, we expect that eventually we'll return `item<Dimensions>` and it will mean "no offset".

Author: Added something in 055e1578a2845bf8092071f172c320aae835bf69.
